---
title: "Why does human traffic thrive despite its cruelty?"
description: ""
omit_header_text: true
summary: "Essay for ENG 112"
tags: [human traffic, ethic]
---

## Introduction

Human traffic is a horrifying issue that affects millions of people around the world. It’s the second most profitable illicit industry globally, generating $150 million annually (Niethammer; International Labor Organization [ILO], qt. in United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime [UNODC]). There are two main types of human trafficking: sex trafficking and labor trafficking. Sex trafficking is the most common, consisting of 79% of all trafficking cases, while labor trafficking consists of around 18% (UNODC). However, other forms exist, including organ removal, forced marriage, child soldiers, and state-sponsored (“How and Why Does Human Trafficking Happen”).

## Forms of Human Trafficking

Sex trafficking has been explosive growing worldwide as cultural values have shifted, and people see sex as a means of personal gratification with no regard for how their sexual appetites or actions impact others (“How and Why Does Human Trafficking Happen”). Most of the victims are women and girls, but there is still a large number of men, particularly LGBT+ men (“Why Human Trafficking Is More Than Just a Moral Issue”). Labor trafficking is often misrepresented because forced labor is less frequently detected and reported, occurring in various industries where vulnerable populations are exploited. It has surged as growing consumer demand for cheap products and services which led companies worldwide to lower wages and finding creative or illegal ways to get more product output while spending less on wages, safety, and care for workers (“How and Why Does Human Trafficking Happen”). Alarmingly, 20% of forced labor victims are children (UNODC). A common misconception is that the victims need to cross borders, but most exploitation takes place close to home (Niethammer).

## Vulnerability and Risk Factors

Traffickers prey on those who can be overpowered, tricked, or manipulated, often exploiting systemic inequalities and disparities. Some factors that create this vulnerability include war, lack of education, government policies that fail to protect people, or personal circumstances (“What Fuels Human Trafficking”).

## Trafficking in Legitimate Industries

The article “Cracking the 150$ billion business of human trafficking” by Forbes demonstrated how “human trafficking often involves the legitimate service of the banking system, transportation companies the hospitality business, healthcare providers, and digital social media companies.” (Niethammer). And how can we detect them. Traffickers use banks to deposit and launder their earnings; they use planes, buses, and taxi services to transport their victims; theybook hotel rooms for sex trafficking; and they are active users of social media platforms to recruit and advertise the services of their victims (Niethammer). In the banking sector, traffickers launder money and do financial transactions, always accompanying the trafficked individual to monitor the transaction and limit the interaction with the financial institution. These are red flags that financial institutions analyze to detect trafficking operations (Niethammer). In hotel industries, traffickers opt for hotel chain franchises since they offer a sense of anonymity and safety. For hotel staff, signs of trafficking operations are “extended stays of customers with few possessions; multiple rooms under one name; someone waits onsite; the room is booked with the business card but is paid in cash; excessive foot traffic in and out of rooms.” (Niethammer). The healthcare sector can be a large player in identifying, treating, and responding appropriately to individuals who are at risk or who have been trafficked. Trafficked individuals can be recruited from drug rehabilitation centers and behavioral and mental health centers, given their potential vulnerability to become dependent and controlled. This makes healthcare providers play an essential role in detecting trafficking operations, as traffickers often seek treatment at hospitals while maintaining strict control over their movements (Niethammer). Given these connections, businesses must take active measures to prevent human trafficking within their systems. As Carmen Niethammer states, “Human trafficking is a $150 billion a year global industry and can’t be fully addressed without businesses taking active and effective measures to reduce the potential for exploitation within their own systems.”

## Factors That Fuel Human Trafficking

Now that we understand what human trafficking is and how it’s involved in our society, it is crucial to examine the factors that fuel this illicit industry. The article “What fuels human trafficking?” by UNICEF U.S.A. highlights three key drives of human trafficking: high profitability with low risk, consumer demand, and systemic inequalities. Firstly, Hannah Gould emphasizes that the high-risk, low dynamic sustains human trafficking. The most profitable illegal industry is drugs. Contrary to this industry, humans can be sold in more than one transaction. Making human trafficking cost-efficient and extremely lucrative for perpetrators.  Additionally, it has been statically proven that the number of prosecutions is lower than the number of convictions. By comparing two sets of data from Statista- “Total Number of Convictions Related to Human Trafficking Worldwide from 2007 to 2022” and “Number of Prosecutions of Human Trafficking Worldwide from 2007 to 2020”- we can notice the growth in prosecutions over the years. However, despite this increase, convictions remain low. In 2007, the number of prosecutions was 5,682, but the convictions only 3,427, and in 2020, the prosecutions 9,876, but the convictions only 5,011. Reflecting a 73% growth in the prosecutes from 2007 to 2020 but only a 46% growth in the convictions. This suggests that despite growing awareness, trafficking still faces a relatively low chance of being sentence, with only a 50% likelihood of imprisonment. Second, consumers demand for cheap goods plays a significant role in fueling human trafficking. This incentivizing corporations to cut costs, often leading to exploitation in labor practices and the commercialization of sex; this includes strip clubs, pornography, and prostitution to recruit and exploit children. And lastly, the “systemic inequalities and disparities make certain groups much more vulnerable to exploitation.” (UNICEF U.S.A.) Factors such as extreme poverty, social violence, harmful cultural norms, and armed conflict are factors that push individuals into trafficking situations. Individuals in desperate financial conditions are more likely to accept risky job offers or girls deprived of education are more likely to be sold by their parents for child marriage.

## Prevention Strategies

This way, we can conclude that human trafficking continues to be a critical issue in our modern society, affecting millions of individuals worldwide and severely impacting communities. To create a safer environment for everyone, it is vital to implement effective strategies to prevent human trafficking. The National Center for Preventing and Prosecuting Trafficking in Persons (NCPTF), an organization dedicated to combating this ongoing problem, offers 31 ways to prevent human trafficking. Among these strategies are key actions such as learning how to spot signs of human exploitation, finding out if your local school has a trafficking prevention plan, or donating to a trafficking prevention non-profit. By taking these proactive measures, individuals and communities can play an active role in the ongoing fight against human trafficking. No matter how small, every action contributes to building a protective network to help prevent exploitation and support victims in their recovery.

## Conclusion

In conclusion, human trafficking remains a troubling issue that impacts millions worldwide. Despite the growing awareness, it continues to thrive due to by high profits, low conviction rates, consumer demand for cheap goods, and systematic inequalities. Victims are repletely exploited for financial gain, while traffickers face minimal legal consequences. The demand for cheap labor and sexual exploitation fuel this industry, as corporations seek low-cost labor, and commercial sex trade continues to thrive. Furthermore, poverty, violence and social disparities leave vulnerable populations at greater risk of being trafficked.
To tackle this issue, a required effort is needed. Governments must strengthen anti-trafficking laws and raise public awareness to help people recognize the signs of trafficking. Corporations must eliminate exploitative labor practices. And individuals must recognize signs of human trafficking, support prevention initiatives, and advocate for change. Human traffic is not just a crime, it is a violation of human rights that demand a worldwide collaboration and unwavering commitment to justice. Only through collective actions can we dismantle the system that allows this moder form of slavery to persist.

## Works Cited

Niethammer, Carmen. “Cracking the $150 Billion Business of Human Trafficking.” Forbes, 2 Feb. 2020, www.forbes.com/sites/carmenniethammer/2020/02/02/cracking-the-150-billionbusiness-of-human-trafficking/.
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC). Global Report on Trafficking in Persons. www.unodc.org/unodc/en/human-trafficking/global-report-ontrafficking-in-persons.html.
Florida State University College of Social Sciences & Public Policy. “Why Human Trafficking Is More Than Just a Moral Issue.” FSU College of Social Sciences & Public Policy, cosspp.fsu.edu/why-human-trafficking-is-more-than-just-a-moralissue.
Nightlight International. “How and Why Does Human Trafficking Happen.” Nightlight International, www.nightlightinternational.com/post/how-and-why-doeshuman-trafficking-happen.
UNICEF USA. “What Fuels Human Trafficking?” UNICEF USA, www.unicefusa.org/stories/what-fuels-human-trafficking.
National Center for Preventing and Prosecuting Trafficking in Persons (NCPTF). “31 Ways to Help Prevent Human Trafficking.” NCPTF, https://ncptf.org/31-ways-to-help-prevent-human-trafficking/.